## Default mode network

The default mode network is a [brain](Brain.md) network primarily composed of the dorsal [medial prefrontal cortex]() and [posterior cingulate cortex](Posterior%20cingulate%20cortex.md) and also involves the [precuneus](Precuneus.md) and [angular gyrus](). The network forms a critical and centrally located hub of [brain](Brain.md) activity that links parts of the [cerebral cortex]() to the [limbic system](Limbic%20system.md).

Working at a remove from our sensory processing of the outside experienced world, the default mode is most active when we are engaged in higher-level “metacognitive” processes such as activities that involve self-reference, thinking about others, remembering the past, planning for the future, mental constructs, moral reasoning, and “theory of mind”—the ability to attribute mental states to others, as when we try to imagine “what it is like” to be someone. It is also linked to [clinging](Clinging.md) to or trying to control ones experience. These thoughts and activities share the common feature of *me*: *I’m* remembering, *I’m* deciding, *i* want, etc. Thus, it is sometimes refereed to as the “me” network—linking ourselves to our inner and outer worlds. This is why [decreased activity in the default mode network correlated with a decreased sense of self](Decreased%20activity%20in%20the%20default%20mode%20network%20correlated%20with%20a%20decreased%20sense%20of%20self.md). 

One of the most important—and sometimes pernicious—constructs created by the default mode network is what we call the self, or [ego](Ego.md). If a researcher gives you a list of adjectives and asks you to consider how they apply to you, it is your default mode network that leaps into action. (It also lights up when we receive “likes” on our social media feeds.) Nodes in the default network are also thought to be responsible for autobiographical memory, the material from which we compose the story of who we are, by linking our past experiences with what happens to us and with projections of our future goals. Self-reflection can lead to great intellectual and artistic achievement but also to destructive forms of self-regard and many types of unhappiness.

The default mode network is best known for being active when a person is not focused on the outside world and the [brain](Brain.md) is at wakeful rest, such as during daydreaming and mindwandering, which seems to be involved in tracking your environment and body for possible threats. It may be through these very structures that the stream of our [consciousness](Consciousness.md) flows. All these functions may belong exclusively to humans, and specifically to adult humans, for the default mode network isn’t operational until late in a child’s development. Lapses in attention have been linked to increased activity in these [brain](Brain.md) regions. When our attention lapses, we fall into a daydream, or we start thinking about something we may need to do later, and then these [brain](Brain.md) regions light up. The default network stands in a kind of seesaw relationship with the [task-positive network]() that wake up whenever the outside world demands our attention; when one is active, the other goes quiet, and vice versa.

Because [the brain developed a hierarchical structure through evolution by building off of its preexisting capabilities](The%20brain%20developed%20a%20hierarchical%20structure%20through%20evolution%20by%20building%20off%20of%20its%20preexisting%20capabilities.md), the default mode network exerts a top-down influence on the older [brain](Brain.md) structures, many of which communicate with one another through its centrally located hub. Neuroscientist Dr. [Robin Carhart-Harris]() has described the DMN variously as the [brain](Brain.md)’s “orchestra conductor,” “corporate executive,” or “capital city,” charged with managing and “holding the whole system together.” And with keeping the [brain](Brain.md)’s unrulier tendencies in check. Most notably including the [limbic system](Limbic%20system.md) involved in emotion and memory, in much the same way [Freud]()conceived of the [ego](Ego.md) keeping the anarchic forces of the unconscious [id]() in check. [David Nutt]() puts the matter bluntly, claiming that in the DMN “we’ve found the neural correlate for repression.”

The [brain](Brain.md) consists of several different specialized systems—one for visual processing, for example, another to control motor activity—each doing its own thing. Chaos is averted because all systems are not created equal, Electrical signaling from some [brain](Brain.md) areas takes precedence over others. At the top of this hierarchy resides the DMN, which acts as an uber-conductor to ensure that the cacophony of competing signals from one system do not interfere with those from another. The default mode network keeps order in a system so complex it might otherwise descend into the anarchy of [mental illness](). The default mode network doesn’t only exert top-down control over material arising from within; it also helps regulate what is let into consciousness from the world outside. It operates as a kind of filter in which [our brains unconsciously focus on only a select few of the sensory signals it receives that it considers important](Our%20brains%20unconsciously%20focus%20on%20only%20a%20select%20few%20of%20the%20sensory%20signals%20it%20receives%20that%20it%20considers%20important.md).

Practices such as [mindfulness](Mindfulness.md) and [non-forcing](Non-forcing.md) have been shown to reduce activity in the default mode network: [Real-time FMRI of meditators showed decreased default mode network activity when concentrated](Real-time%20FMRI%20of%20meditators%20showed%20decreased%20default%20mode%20network%20activity%20when%20concentrated.md). It can also occur through the use of [psychedelic](Psychedelic.md)s. Other methods may include means of certain breathing exercises (like holotropic breathwork), sensory deprivation, fasting, prayer, overwhelming experiences of awe, extreme sports, near-death experiences, and so on. This quieting might be accomplished by restricting blood flow to the network, or by stimulating the [serotonin](Serotonin.md) [2A receptor]()s in the [cortex]().

---

##### References

* Brewer, Judson. (2017). [The Craving Mind Why We Get Hooked and How We Can Break Bad Habits Chapter 6. Addicted to Thinking](The%20Craving%20Mind%20Why%20We%20Get%20Hooked%20and%20How%20We%20Can%20Break%20Bad%20Habits%20Chapter%206.%20Addicted%20to%20Thinking.md) (Location 1585). New Haven, CT: *Yale University Press*. 

* Pollan, Micheal. (2018). [How to Change Your Mind Chapter 5 The Neuroscience Your Brain on Psychedelics](How%20to%20Change%20Your%20Mind%20Chapter%205%20The%20Neuroscience%20Your%20Brain%20on%20Psychedelics.md) (Location 4122). New York, NY: *Penguin Random House*. 

* Pollan, Micheal. (2018). [How to Change Your Mind Chapter 5 The Neuroscience Your Brain on Psychedelics](How%20to%20Change%20Your%20Mind%20Chapter%205%20The%20Neuroscience%20Your%20Brain%20on%20Psychedelics.md) (Location 4176). New York, NY: *Penguin Random House*. 

* Pollan, Micheal. (2018). [How to Change Your Mind Chapter 5 The Neuroscience Your Brain on Psychedelics](How%20to%20Change%20Your%20Mind%20Chapter%205%20The%20Neuroscience%20Your%20Brain%20on%20Psychedelics.md) (Location 4188). New York, NY: *Penguin Random House*. 

* Hanson, Rick. (2009). [Buddha's Brain The Practical Neuroscience of Happiness, Love, and Wisdom Chapter 2.The Evolution of Suffering](Buddha's%20Brain%20The%20Practical%20Neuroscience%20of%20Happiness,%20Love,%20and%20Wisdom%20Chapter%202.The%20Evolution%20of%20Suffering.md) (p. 44). New Harbinger Publications: *Oakland, CA*.

* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Default_mode_network

##### Metadata

Type: #🔵/🔵 
Tags: [Biology]() / [Neuroscience](Neuroscience.md) / [Anatomy]() / [Neuroanatomy](Neuroanatomy.md)
Status: #☀️ 
