## Distinct brain networks are able to communicate and connect more openly when the default mode network is inactive

Various scanning technologies that the Imperial College lab has used to map the tripping [brain](Brain.md) show that the specialized neural networks of the [brain](Brain.md)—such as the [default mode network](Default%20mode%20network.md) and the [visual processing system]() each become disintegrated, while the [brain](Brain.md) as a whole becomes more integrated as new connections spring up among regions that ordinarily kept mainly to themselves or were linked only via the central hub of the [default mode network](Default%20mode%20network.md). Put another way, the various networks of the [brain](Brain.md) became less specialized. The whole [brain](Brain.md) becomes like the [right hemisphere](Right%20hemisphere.md), as [the right hemisphere has a more loose orginazational structure than the left hemisphere](The%20right%20hemisphere%20has%20a%20more%20loose%20orginazational%20structure%20than%20the%20left%20hemisphere.md). Distinct networks became less distinct under the influence of [psychedelic](Psychedelic.md)s or during meditation, implying that they communicate more openly with other [brain](Brain.md) networks. The [brain](Brain.md) operates with greater flexibility and interconnectedness under [psychedelic](Psychedelic.md)s and meditation.

In a 2014 paper published in the Journal of the Royal Society Interface, the Imperial College team demonstrated how the usual lines of communications within the [brain](Brain.md) are radically reorganized when the [default mode network](Default%20mode%20network.md) goes off-line and a [high-entropy state](High-entropy%20state.md) is allowed to rise. Using a scanning technique called magnetoencephalography, which maps electrical activity in the [brain](Brain.md), the authors produced a map of the [brain](Brain.md)s internal communications during normal waking [consciousness](Consciousness.md) and after an injection of [psilocybin](). In its normal [low-entropy state](Low-entropy%20state.md), the [brain](Brain.md)’s various networks talk mostly to themselves, with a relatively few heavily trafficked pathways among them. But when the [brain](Brain.md) operates under the influence of [psilocybin](), thousands of new connections form, linking far-flung [brain](Brain.md) regions that during normal waking [consciousness](Consciousness.md) don’t exchange much information. In effect, traffic is rerouted from a relatively small number of interstate highways onto myriad smaller roads linking a great many more destinations. The [brain](Brain.md) appears to become less specialized and more globally interconnected, with considerably more intercourse, or “cross talk,” among its various neighborhoods. 

There are several ways this temporary rewiring of the [brain](Brain.md) may affect mental experience. When the [limbic system](Limbic%20system.md) is allowed to communicate directly with the [visual processing center]()s, it’s possible our wishes and fears, prejudices and emotions, begin to inform what we see—a hallmark of [high-entropy state](High-entropy%20state.md)s and a recipe for magical thinking. Likewise, the establishment of new linkages across [brain](Brain.md) systems can give rise to synesthesia, as when sense information gets cross-wired so that colors become sounds or sounds become tactile. Or the new links give rise to hallucination. The forming of still other kinds of novel connections could manifest in mental experience as a new idea, a fresh perspective, a creative insight, or the ascribing of new meanings to familiar things. The increase in entropy allows a thousand mental states to bloom, many of them bizarre and senseless, but some number of them revelatory, imaginative, and, at least potentially, transformative.

I believe that silencing the [default mode network](Default%20mode%20network.md) brings us into a state of [Imprint](Imprint.md) vulnerability. [Our brains unconsciously focus on only a select few of the sensory signals it receives that it considers important](Our%20brains%20unconsciously%20focus%20on%20only%20a%20select%20few%20of%20the%20sensory%20signals%20it%20receives%20that%20it%20considers%20important.md). As the [default mode network](Default%20mode%20network.md) goes quite, the [brain](Brain.md) widens its field of attention and attends to signals the [default mode network](Default%20mode%20network.md) usually edits out. As the [brain](Brain.md) processes all this new information, there is an explosion of [neurogenesis](Neurogenesis.md), and new programs may be [imprint](Imprint.md)ed onto these new [neuron](Neuron.md)s and neural pathways.

---

##### References

* Pollan, Micheal. (2018). [How to Change Your Mind Chapter 5. The Neuroscience Your Brain on Psychedelics](How%20to%20Change%20Your%20Mind%20Chapter%205.%20The%20Neuroscience%20Your%20Brain%20on%20Psychedelics.md) (Location 4312). New York, NY: *Penguin Random House*. 

##### Metadata

Type: #🔴 
Tags: [Biology]() / [Neuroscience](Neuroscience.md) / [Biochemistry](Biochemistry.md) / [Neurochemistry](Neurochemistry.md) / [Pharmacology]() 
Status: #☀️ 
