## Self-referential statement  #⏳

Consider the proposition "Marylin Manroe was the most beautiful woman of her time." This can hardly be considered a scientific statement since there is no such instrument as a pulchritometer that can give us a measurement in milivenuses comparing Ms. Monroe to say, Jane Russell or Diana Dors. Nor is it a mathematical statement, obviously. It isn't a legal verdict since no jury ruled on the case. This statement would be considered a self-referental statement. Properley, it should be rephrased as "Marylin Manroe seems like the most beautiful woman of her time to me." Stated thus, it is "true." Such self-referential statements are only true to one person or one group of persons at a time, and do not refer to anyone but those who espouse them. This does not mean that they are "false," but only that they are more relative and subjective than legal proofs, for instance, and are very, very different to scientific or mathematical proofs. 

It seems that a potential source of error, and a potential source of dogmatism, enters our thinking when our language is not pedantic enough. "Marylin Monroe was the most beautiful woman of her time" seems to be a statement about some "objective reality" and can easily lead to some arguement with Sophia Loren fans; but "Marylin Monroe seems like the most beautiful woman of her time to me" declares itself as a self-referential proposition and does not so readily get confused with "objective" statements. Similarly, the proposition "Beethoven is a better composer than Mozart," might most profitably be considered a self-referential statement, which should be reformulated more correctly to "Beethoven seems a better composer than Mozart to me." Of course, music and art criticism would be a lot less lively and bitchy if this semantic reform were accepted; but it might make more sense. 

According to [positivists](Logical%20positivism.md), statements about the comparative beauty of Monroe or Loren, Beethoven and Mozart, Van Gogh and Picasso, etc. would all be considered "[meaningless statement](Meaningless%20statement.md)s." We are not being so stringent here. We can grant that such statements are meaningful to the people who are making them. We are merely suggesting that, by callng them self referential, we can avoid the errors and emotional tantrums that occur when that they are statements of the same order as those about the boiling point of water, pq equals qp, or even about Dr. Crippen poisoning his wife.

The proposition "Lady Chatterley's Lover is a pornographic novel" might be said that it this was a legal [Relative truth](Relative%20truth.md) until the courts changed their minds about that. It might also be said that this kind of statement is as self-referential as the ones about comparative beauty, and the courts in considering the matter were confusing the self-referential class with other more objective classes. Until pulchritometers and smutometers arive on the market, it might be wise to regard statements about beauty and pornography as at least self referential, even if we do not join the [verificationists](Verificationism.md) in calling them totally meaningless. 

But then what about the proposition "Lady Chatterley's Lover is a sexist novel"? If we call that a self-referential statement too, we will make our selves even more unpopular. We seem to be entering a borderline area were the "scientific," the "aesthetic," and the "moral" cannot be disentangled to the satisfaction of any two commentators: were "subjective" and "objective" indeed overlap alarmingly. Perhaps recognizing that problem, instead of trying to solve it, is itself a step towards clarity. 

Most modern logicians would consider the proposition "God has spoken to me" as equally meaningless in the previous sense. It may be more accurate to regard this as a badly formulated self-referential statement. That is, just as "Beethoven is better than Mozart" is a bad formulation of the self-referential statement "Beethoven seems better than Mozart to me," It may be most helpful to consider "God has spoken to me" as a bad formulaltion of the correct proposition, "I have had such an awe inspiring experience that the best model I know to describe it is to say that God spoke to me." This is helpful becuase the proposition is only false if the person is deliberatly lying, and it reminds us that similar experiences are also stated within other paradigms, such as "i became one with Buddha-mind" or "i became one with the Universe." These have differnt philosophical meanings than "God has spoken to me," but probably refer to the same [etic experiences](Etic%20Reality.md).

---

##### References

* Wilson, A., Robert (1986). [The New Inquisition Irrational Rationalism and the Citadel of Science Chapter 2. Skepticism and Blind Faith](The%20New%20Inquisition%20Irrational%20Rationalism%20and%20the%20Citadel%20of%20Science%20Chapter%202.%20Skepticism%20and%20Blind%20Faith.md) (Page 63 · Location 1202). Grand Junction, Colorado: *Hilaritas Press*

##### Metadata

Type: #🔵/🔵 
Tags: [Philosophy](Philosophy.md) / [Epistemology](Epistemology.md) / [Logic](Logic.md) / [Semantics](Semantics.md) / [Linguistics]()
Status: #☀️ 
