## Those with impairments in the right frontolimbic regions have trouble with stopping whatever they're currently doing

I think we can also make a connection with the right [ventromedial prefrontal cortex](Ventromedial%20prefrontal%20cortex.md), [orbitofrontal cortex](Orbitofrontal%20cortex.md), [dorsolateral prefrontal cortex](Dorsolateral%20prefrontal%20cortex.md), and a rather fundamental difference between the hemispheres. The [left hemisphere](Left%20hemisphere.md)'s ‘stickiness’, its tendency to recur to what it is familiar with ([the left hemisphere prioritizes things that it already knows and expects](The%20left%20hemisphere%20prioritizes%20things%20that%20it%20already%20knows%20and%20expects.md)), tends to reinforce whatever it is already doing. The [right hemisphere](Right%20hemisphere.md) by contrast, seeing more of the picture ([the right hemisphere has broad, global attention, while the left has narrow attention](The%20right%20hemisphere%20has%20broad,%20global%20attention,%20while%20the%20left%20has%20narrow%20attention.md)), and taking a broader perspective that characteristically includes both its own and the [left hemisphere](Left%20hemisphere.md)'s ([the right hemisphere is able to use the left hemispheres style of cognition, but the left cannot use the rights](The%20right%20hemisphere%20is%20able%20to%20use%20the%20left%20hemispheres%20style%20of%20cognition,%20but%20the%20left%20cannot%20use%20the%20rights.md)), is more reciprocally inclined, and more likely to espouse another point of view.

One way of thinking of this is in terms of feedback systems. Most biological systems seek [homeostasis](Homeostasis.md): if they move too far in one direction, they stabilize themselves by self-correction. This is ‘negative feedback’, the most familiar example of which is the operation of a thermostat: if the temperature constantly tends to drop, the thermostat triggers a heating system that will act to bring the temperature back to the desired level. However, systems can become unstable and enter a situation in which ‘positive feedback’ obtains—in other words, a move in one direction, rather than producing a move in the opposite direction, serves to promote further moves in the same direction, and a snowballing effect occurs.

The [right hemisphere](Right%20hemisphere.md), then, is capable of freeing us through negative feedback. The [left hemisphere](Left%20hemisphere.md) tends toward positive feedback, and we can become stuck. This is not unlike the difference between the normal drinker and the [addict](Addiction.md). After a certain point, the normal drinker begins to feel less like having another drink. What makes an [addict](Addiction.md) is the lack of an ‘off switch’—another drink only makes the next, and the next, more likely. And, interestingly enough, lesions of the frontolimbic systems, mainly in the [right hemisphere](Right%20hemisphere.md), are associated with [addictive](Addiction.md) behavior. Pathological gamblers, for example, have frontal deficits which are mainly right-sided; by contrast, in [cocaine](Cocaine.md) [addicts](Addiction.md), for example, stimulating the right [prefrontal cortex](Prefrontal%20cortex.md) reduces craving for cocaine. And denial, a [left hemisphere](Left%20hemisphere.md) specialty ([The left hemisphere is prone to over-optimistic denial](The%20left%20hemisphere%20is%20prone%20to%20over-optimistic%20denial.md)), is typical of [addiction](Addiction.md).

---

##### References

* Mcgilchrist, Iain. (2010). [The Master and His Emissary Chapter 2. What Do the Hemispheres Do?](The%20Master%20and%20His%20Emissary%20Chapter%202.%20What%20Do%20the%20Hemispheres%20Do%3F.md) (p. 174). London, UK: *Yale University Press*.

##### Metadata

Type: #🔴 
Tags: [Biology]() / [Neuroscience](Neuroscience.md) / [Neuropsychology](Neuropsychology.md) 
Status: #☀️ 
