## Young children and adults under psychedelics are more likely to come up with unconventional solutions to problems

What [spotlight consciousness](Spotlight%20consciousness.md) and [lantern consciousness](Lantern%20consciousness.md) means for cognition and learning can be best understood by looking at machine learning, or artificial intelligence. Specifically the concepts of [high-temperature search](High-temperature%20search.md)es and [low-temperature search](Low-temperature%20search.md)es. Drawing on its wealth of experience, the adult mind performs [low-temperature search](Low-temperature%20search.md)es most of the time when solving problems. Dr. [Alison Gopnik]() believes that both the young child (five and under) and the adult on a [psychedelic](Psychedelic.md) have a stronger predilection for the [high-temperature search](High-temperature%20search.md); in their quest to make sense of things, their minds explore not just the nearby and most likely but “the entire space of possibilities.” These [high-temperature search](High-temperature%20search.md)es might be inefficient, incurring a higher rate of error and requiring more time and mental energy to perform. High-temperature searches can yield answers that are more magical than realistic. Yet there are times when hot searches are the only way to solve a problem, and occasionally they return answers of surpassing beauty and originality. E=mc2 was the product of a [high-temperature search](High-temperature%20search.md).

Gopnik has tested this hypothesis on children in her lab and has found that there are learning problems that four-year-olds are better at solving than adults. These are precisely the kinds of problems that require thinking outside the box, those times when experience hobbles rather than greases the gears of problem solving, often because the problem is so novel. In one experiment, she presented children with a toy box that lights up and plays music when a certain kind of block is placed on top of it. Normally, this “blicket detector” is set to respond to a single block of a certain color or shape, but when the experimenter reprograms the machine so that it responds only when two blocks are placed on it, four-year-olds figure it out much faster than adults do. “Their thinking is less constrained by experience, so they will try even the most unlikely possibilities”; that is, they’ll conduct lots of [high-temperature search](High-temperature%20search.md)es, testing the most far-out hypotheses. “Children are better learners than adults in many cases when the solutions are nonobvious” or, as she puts it, “further out in the space of possibilities,” a realm where they are more at home than we are. Far out, indeed.

The adult mind is, in a sense, in a rut. Once it knows what is likely to happen in the world, it does not usually bother itself imagining scenarios that do not fall into this pattern. A child who has yet to develop a fully formed [default mode network](Default%20mode%20network.md) may spend time imagining what their life would be like if they had a pet dinosaur they could ride to school and impress their friends with. An adult, in contrast, will think about what they need from the shops and what to watch on Netflix that evening. On one level, this is a much more practical and energy-efficient use of the brain, but it may not be the way to a richer, more fulfilling life.

---

##### References

* Pollan, Micheal. (2018). [How to Change Your Mind Chapter 5 The Neuroscience Your Brain on Psychedelics](How%20to%20Change%20Your%20Mind%20Chapter%205%20The%20Neuroscience%20Your%20Brain%20on%20Psychedelics.md) (Location 4431). New York, NY: *Penguin Random House*. 

##### Metadata

Type:  #🔴 
Tags: [Psychology](Psychology.md) / [Biology]() / [Neuroscience](Neuroscience.md) / [Biochemistry](Biochemistry.md) / [Neurochemistry](Neurochemistry.md) / [Pharmacology]() 
Status: #☀️ 
